doc/usage.rst, before:

Simple usage
============

Write a workbook
----------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> from openpyxl.compat import range
>>> from openpyxl.utils import get_column_letter
>>>
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>>
>>> dest_filename = 'empty_book.xlsx'
>>>
>>> ws1 = wb.active
>>> ws1.title = "range names"
>>>
>>> for row in range(1, 40):
...     ws1.append(range(600))
>>>
>>> ws2 = wb.create_sheet(title="Pi")
>>>
>>> ws2['F5'] = 3.14
>>>
>>> ws3 = wb.create_sheet(title="Data")
>>> for row in range(10, 20):
...     for col in range(27, 54):
...         _ = ws3.cell(column=col, row=row, value="{0}".format(get_column_letter(col)))
>>> print(ws3['AA10'].value)
AA
>>> wb.save(filename = dest_filename)


Write a workbook from \*.xltx as \*.xlsx
----------------------------------------
.. ::doctest

>>> from openpyxl import load_workbook
>>>
>>>
>>> wb = load_workbook('sample_book.xltx') #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws = wb.active #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws['D2'] = 42 #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> wb.save('sample_book.xlsx') #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> # or you can overwrite the current document template
>>> # wb.save('sample_book.xltx')


Write a workbook from \*.xltm as \*.xlsm
----------------------------------------
.. ::doctest

>>> from openpyxl import load_workbook
>>>
>>>
>>> wb = load_workbook('sample_book.xltm', keep_vba=True) #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws = wb.active #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws['D2'] = 42 #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> wb.save('sample_book.xlsm') #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> # or you can overwrite the current document template
>>> # wb.save('sample_book.xltm')


Read an existing workbook
-------------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import load_workbook
>>> wb = load_workbook(filename = 'empty_book.xlsx')
>>> sheet_ranges = wb['range names']
>>> print(sheet_ranges['D18'].value)
3


.. note ::

    There are several flags that can be used in load_workbook.

    - `guess_types` will enable or disable (default) type inference when
      reading cells.

    - `data_only` controls whether cells with formulae have either the
      formula (default) or the value stored the last time Excel read the sheet.

    - `keep_vba` controls whether any Visual Basic elements are preserved or
      not (default). If they are preserved they are still not editable.


.. warning ::

    openpyxl does currently not read all possible items in an Excel file so
    images and charts will be lost from existing files if they are opened and
    saved with the same name.


Using number formats
--------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> import datetime
>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>> # set date using a Python datetime
>>> ws['A1'] = datetime.datetime(2010, 7, 21)
>>>
>>> ws['A1'].number_format
'yyyy-mm-dd h:mm:ss'
>>> # You can enable type inference on a case-by-case basis
>>> wb.guess_types = True
>>> # set percentage using a string followed by the percent sign
>>> ws['B1'] = '3.14%'
>>> wb.guess_types = False
>>> ws['B1'].value
0.031400000000000004
>>>
>>> ws['B1'].number_format
'0%'


Using formulae
--------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>> # add a simple formula
>>> ws["A1"] = "=SUM(1, 1)"
>>> wb.save("formula.xlsx")

.. warning::
    NB you must use the English name for a function and function arguments *must* be separated by commas and not other punctuation such as semi-colons.

openpyxl never evaluates formula but it is possible to check the name of a formula:

.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl.utils import FORMULAE
>>> "HEX2DEC" in FORMULAE
True

If you're trying to use a formula that isn't known this could be because you're using a formula that was not included in the initial specification. Such formulae must be prefixed with `xlfn.` to work.

Merge / Unmerge cells
---------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl.workbook import Workbook
>>>
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>>
>>> ws.merge_cells('A1:B1')
>>> ws.unmerge_cells('A1:B1')
>>>
>>> # or
>>> ws.merge_cells(start_row=2,start_column=1,end_row=2,end_column=4)
>>> ws.unmerge_cells(start_row=2,start_column=1,end_row=2,end_column=4)


Inserting an image
-------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> from openpyxl.drawing.image import Image
>>>
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>> ws['A1'] = 'You should see three logos below'

>>> # create an image
>>> img = Image('logo.png')

>>> # add to worksheet and anchor next to cells
>>> ws.add_image(img, 'A1')
>>> wb.save('logo.xlsx')


Fold columns (outline)
----------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> import openpyxl
>>> wb = openpyxl.Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.create_sheet()
>>> ws.column_dimensions.group('A','D', hidden=True)
>>> wb.save('group.xlsx')

Commit message:

Add sample code for formatting merged cells.

doc/usage.rst, after:

Simple usage
============

Write a workbook
----------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> from openpyxl.compat import range
>>> from openpyxl.utils import get_column_letter
>>>
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>>
>>> dest_filename = 'empty_book.xlsx'
>>>
>>> ws1 = wb.active
>>> ws1.title = "range names"
>>>
>>> for row in range(1, 40):
...     ws1.append(range(600))
>>>
>>> ws2 = wb.create_sheet(title="Pi")
>>>
>>> ws2['F5'] = 3.14
>>>
>>> ws3 = wb.create_sheet(title="Data")
>>> for row in range(10, 20):
...     for col in range(27, 54):
...         _ = ws3.cell(column=col, row=row, value="{0}".format(get_column_letter(col)))
>>> print(ws3['AA10'].value)
AA
>>> wb.save(filename = dest_filename)


Write a workbook from \*.xltx as \*.xlsx
----------------------------------------
.. ::doctest

>>> from openpyxl import load_workbook
>>>
>>>
>>> wb = load_workbook('sample_book.xltx') #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws = wb.active #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws['D2'] = 42 #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> wb.save('sample_book.xlsx') #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> # or you can overwrite the current document template
>>> # wb.save('sample_book.xltx')


Write a workbook from \*.xltm as \*.xlsm
----------------------------------------
.. ::doctest

>>> from openpyxl import load_workbook
>>>
>>>
>>> wb = load_workbook('sample_book.xltm', keep_vba=True) #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws = wb.active #doctest: +SKIP
>>> ws['D2'] = 42 #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> wb.save('sample_book.xlsm') #doctest: +SKIP
>>>
>>> # or you can overwrite the current document template
>>> # wb.save('sample_book.xltm')


Read an existing workbook
-------------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import load_workbook
>>> wb = load_workbook(filename = 'empty_book.xlsx')
>>> sheet_ranges = wb['range names']
>>> print(sheet_ranges['D18'].value)
3


.. note ::

    There are several flags that can be used in load_workbook.

    - `guess_types` will enable or disable (default) type inference when
      reading cells.

    - `data_only` controls whether cells with formulae have either the
      formula (default) or the value stored the last time Excel read the sheet.

    - `keep_vba` controls whether any Visual Basic elements are preserved or
      not (default). If they are preserved they are still not editable.


.. warning ::

    openpyxl does currently not read all possible items in an Excel file so
    images and charts will be lost from existing files if they are opened and
    saved with the same name.


Using number formats
--------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> import datetime
>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>> # set date using a Python datetime
>>> ws['A1'] = datetime.datetime(2010, 7, 21)
>>>
>>> ws['A1'].number_format
'yyyy-mm-dd h:mm:ss'
>>> # You can enable type inference on a case-by-case basis
>>> wb.guess_types = True
>>> # set percentage using a string followed by the percent sign
>>> ws['B1'] = '3.14%'
>>> wb.guess_types = False
>>> ws['B1'].value
0.031400000000000004
>>>
>>> ws['B1'].number_format
'0%'


Using formulae
--------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>> # add a simple formula
>>> ws["A1"] = "=SUM(1, 1)"
>>> wb.save("formula.xlsx")

.. warning::
    NB you must use the English name for a function and function arguments *must* be separated by commas and not other punctuation such as semi-colons.

openpyxl never evaluates formula but it is possible to check the name of a formula:

.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl.utils import FORMULAE
>>> "HEX2DEC" in FORMULAE
True

If you're trying to use a formula that isn't known this could be because you're using a formula that was not included in the initial specification. Such formulae must be prefixed with `xlfn.` to work.

Merge / Unmerge cells
---------------------

When you merge cells all cells but the top-left one are **removed** from the
worksheet. See :ref:`styling-merged-cells` for information on formatting merged cells.

.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl.workbook import Workbook
>>>
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>>
>>> ws.merge_cells('A1:B1')
>>> ws.unmerge_cells('A1:B1')
>>>
>>> # or
>>> ws.merge_cells(start_row=2,start_column=1,end_row=2,end_column=4)
>>> ws.unmerge_cells(start_row=2,start_column=1,end_row=2,end_column=4)


Inserting an image
-------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> from openpyxl import Workbook
>>> from openpyxl.drawing.image import Image
>>>
>>> wb = Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.active
>>> ws['A1'] = 'You should see three logos below'

>>> # create an image
>>> img = Image('logo.png')

>>> # add to worksheet and anchor next to cells
>>> ws.add_image(img, 'A1')
>>> wb.save('logo.xlsx')


Fold columns (outline)
----------------------
.. :: doctest

>>> import openpyxl
>>> wb = openpyxl.Workbook()
>>> ws = wb.create_sheet()
>>> ws.column_dimensions.group('A','D', hidden=True)
>>> wb.save('group.xlsx')
